Using campaign tags for display, re-marketing, email,
PPC and other campaign types provides several benefits to your Google Analytics tracking.
Properly tagging campaigns with UTM parameters,
allows you more accurate channel reporting,
source medium reporting, and also
populates your all campaigns report with data in Google Analytics.
Campaign tracking relies on the UTM tagging building walks.
Source and medium are both required parameters.
Campaign is technically optional but we strongly recommend that you also use
the UTM campaign parameter in order to provide as
much rich detail and granularity as possible to your reporting.
Campaign tags, UTM tags,
and UTM parameters are all terms you may hear in reference to campaign tagging,
and they all mean the same thing.
Source is typically the website or advertising platform that's sending you the traffic.
For example, Google or Facebook.
Medium is typically the ad format or
the ad platform or in some cases the ad pricing format.
So, for example, you might see Banner,
email, or CPC as the UTM medium value.
Campaign is typically an easily recognizable and abbreviated form
of the larger ad campaign.
Something like holiday 2018,
might be a perfectly valid UTM campaign parameter value.
Let's take a look at this chart put together by my colleague Eric.
This chart demonstrates how Google Analytics reports data in
the absence of UTM campaign tagging or other campaign tagging information.
So, looking at this chart we can see there's
some pretty major marketing initiatives that are essentially getting sold short.
When we don't tag the campaigns properly. What do I mean?
Well, at the top of the list email many organizations devote
considerable resources and expect
a significant return from their e-mail marketing programs.
In this case if you don't tag your email marketing campaign traffic with UTM parameters,
that traffic is going to get captured as either direct or referral traffic.
Not very helpful if you want to actually assess your email campaign performance.
Similarly, Banner display traffic as well
as re-marketing display traffic comes in as referral,
in the absence of campaign tracking.
You can see down the list affiliates will come in
as referral traffic from the affiliate websites,
that's referring the traffic.
Unless you tag those affiliate URLs.
We see how important it is based on the default reporting behavior,
that if you want granular detail into
your campaign performance in the Google Analytics environment,
you must ensure that you use the building blocks of
UTM campaign parameters to track your traffic appropriately.
Let's take a look in the Google Analytics interface for a moment,
and see the reporting under the acquisitions tab,
that's impacted by your campaign tagging practices.
Right now we're looking at
the default channel groupings report under acquisitions or traffic.
Here we can see typical listings of channels,
from organic search, social, direct,
referral, paid search, affiliates, display and other.
All of these channels rely on system configure rules,
as well as customizable rules that determine what channel to group this traffic into
based on the UTM parameters for source medium and in some cases campaign.
So, the more accurate you are with
your tagging practices and the more consistent you are,
the more likely that you'll also get
accurate default channel groupings without having to do a great deal of customization.
Additionally, under all traffic if we
look at the source medium reporting at Google Analytics,
we can also see this is built on the UTM source and UTM medium parameters.
So, again we do not want to short change ourselves
in terms of our reporting capabilities in those arenas.
Looking at the all campaigns report under the acquisitions tab,
we can see a lot of rich detail,
into a very specific campaigns that drove
not only traffic but transaction activity to the Google merchandise store.
Just to reiterate this level of campaign detail would not be
possible without also using UTM source and UTM medium.
If those tracking parameters are not present even if you use the UTM campaign parameter,
you will not get the expected reporting and that campaign data will be missing.
So, make sure that you use UTM source and
UTM medium in conjunction with your UTM campaign parameter,
and you can see this great level of detail for
both user behavior and acquisition activity tied to that campaign traffic.